
=== PAGE 77 ===
Chapter	Summary
Small	changes	in	context	can	lead	to	large	changes	in	behavior	over
time.
Every	habit	is	initiated	by	a	cue.	We	are	more	likely	to	notice	cues	that
stand	out.
Make	the	cues	of	good	habits	obvious	in	your	environment.
Gradually,	your	habits	become	associated	not	with	a	single	trigger	but
with	the	entire	context	surrounding	the	behavior.	The	context	becomes
the	cue.
It	is	easier	to	build	new	habits	in	a	new	environment	because	you	are
not	fighting	against	old	cues.
=== PAGE 78 ===
7
The	Secret	to	Self-Control
I
N	 1971
,	as	the	Vietnam	War	was	heading	into	its	sixteenth	year,	congressmen
Robert	Steele	from	Connecticut	and	Morgan	Murphy	from	Illinois	made	a
discovery	that	stunned	the	American	public.	While	visiting	the	troops,	they	had
learned	that	over	15	percent	of	U.S.	soldiers	stationed	there	were	heroin	addicts.
Follow-up	research	revealed	that	35	percent	of	service	members	in	Vietnam	had
tried	heroin	and	as	many	as	20	percent	were	addicted—the	problem	was	even
worse	than	they	had	initially	thought.
The	discovery	led	to	a	flurry	of	activity	in	Washington,	including	
the	creation
of	the	Special	Action	Office	of	Drug	Abuse	Prevention	under	President	Nixon	to
promote	prevention	and	rehabilitation	and	to	track	addicted	service	members
when	they	returned	home.
Lee	Robins	was	one	of	the	researchers	in	charge.	In	a	finding	that	completely
upended	the	accepted	beliefs	about	addiction,	Robins	found	that	when	soldiers
who	had	been	heroin	users	returned	home,	only	5	percent	of	them	became
readdicted	within	a	year,	and	just	12	percent	relapsed	within	three	years.	In	other
words,	approximately	
nine	out	of	
ten	soldiers	who	used	heroin	in	Vietnam
eliminated	their	addiction	nearly	overnight.
This	finding	contradicted	the	prevailing	view	at	the	time,	which	considered
heroin	addiction	to	be	a	permanent	and	irreversible	condition.	Instead,	Robins
revealed	that	addictions	could	spontaneously	dissolve	if	there	was	a	radical
change	in	the	environment.	In	Vietnam,	soldiers	spent	all	day	surrounded	by
cues	triggering	heroin	use:	it	was	easy	to	access,	they	were	engulfed	by	the
constant	stress	of	war,	they	built	friendships	with	fellow	soldiers	who	were	also
heroin	users,	and	they	were	thousands	of	miles	from	home.	Once	a	soldier
returned	to	the	United	States,	though,	he	found	himself	in	an	environment	devoid
of	those	triggers.	When	the	context	changed,	so	did	the	habit.
Compare	this	situation	to	that	of	a	typical	drug	user.	Someone	becomes
=== PAGE 79 ===
addicted	at	home	or	with	friends,	goes	to	a	clinic	to	get	clean—which	is	devoid
of	all	the	environmental	stimuli	that	prompt	their	habit—then	returns	to	their	old
neighborhood	with	all	of	their	previous	cues	that	caused	them	to	get	addicted	in
the	first	place.	It’s	no	wonder	that	usually	you	see	numbers	that	are	the	exact
opposite	of	those	in	the	Vietnam	study.	Typically,	
90	percent	of	heroin	users
become	readdicted	once	they	return	home	from	rehab.
The	Vietnam	studies	ran	counter	to	many	of	our	cultural	beliefs	about	bad
habits	because	it	challenged	the	conventional	association	of	unhealthy	behavior
as	a	moral	weakness.	If	you’re	overweight,	a	smoker,	or	an	addict,	you’ve	been
told	your	entire	life	that	it	is	because	you	lack	self-control—maybe	even	that
you’re	a	bad	person.	The	idea	that	a	little	bit	of	discipline	would	solve	all	our
problems	is	deeply	embedded	in	our	culture.
Recent	research,	however,	shows	something	different.	When	scientists
analyze	people	who	appear	to	have	tremendous	self-control,	it	turns	out	those
individuals	aren’t	all	that	different	from	those	who	are	struggling.	Instead,
“
disciplined”	people	are	better	at	structuring	their	
lives	in	a	way	that	
does	not
require
	heroic	willpower	and	self-control.	In	other	words,	they	spend	less	time	in
tempting	situations.
The	people	with	the	best	self-control	are	typically	the	ones	who	need	to	use	it
the	least.	
It’s	easier	to	practice	self-restraint	when	you	don’t	have	to	use	it	very
often.	So,	yes,	perseverance,	grit,	and	willpower	are	essential	to	success,	but	the
way	to	improve	these	qualities	is	not	by	wishing	you	were	a	more	disciplined
person,	but	by	creating	a	more	disciplined	environment.
This	counterintuitive	idea	makes	even	more	sense	once	you	understand	what
happens	when	a	habit	is	formed	in	the	brain.	
A	habit	that	has	been	encoded	in
the	mind	is	ready	to	be	used	whenever	the	relevant	situation	arises.	When	Patty
Olwell,	a	therapist	from	Austin,	Texas,	started	smoking,	she	would	often	light	up
while	riding	horses	with	a	friend.	Eventually,	she	quit	smoking	and	avoided	it
for	years.	She	had	also	stopped	riding.	Decades	later,	she	hopped	on	a	horse
again	and	found	herself	craving	a	cigarette	for	the	first	time	in	forever.	
The	cues
were	still	internalized;	she	just	hadn’t	been	exposed	to	them	in	a	long	time.
Once	a	habit	has	been	encoded,	the	urge	to	act	follows	whenever	the
environmental	cues	reappear.	This	is	one	reason	behavior	change	techniques	can
backfire.	
Shaming	obese	people	with	weight-loss	presentations	can	make	them
feel	stressed,	and	as	a	result	many	people	return	to	their	favorite	coping	strategy:
overeating.	
Showing	pictures	of	blackened	lungs	to	smokers	leads	to	higher
levels	of	anxiety,	which	drives	many	people	to	reach	for	a	cigarette.	If	you’re	not
careful	about	cues,	you	can	cause	the	very	behavior	you	want	to	stop.
Bad	habits	are	autocatalytic:	the	process	feeds	itself.	They	foster	the	feelings
=== PAGE 80 ===
they	try	to	numb.	You	feel	bad,	so	you	eat	junk	food.	Because	you	eat	junk	food,
you	feel	bad.	Watching	television	makes	you	feel	sluggish,	so	you	watch	more
television	because	you	don’t	have	the	energy	to	do	anything	else.	Worrying
about	your	health	makes	you	feel	
anxious,	which	causes	you	to	smoke	to	ease
your	anxiety,	which	makes	your	health	even	worse	and	soon	you’re	feeling	more
anxious.	It’s	a	downward	spiral,	a	runaway	train	of	bad	habits.
Researchers	refer	to	this	phenomenon	as	“cue-induced	wanting”:	an	external
trigger	causes	a	compulsive	craving	to	repeat	a	bad	habit.	Once	you	
notice
something,	you	begin	to	
want
	it.	This	process	is	happening	all	the	time—often
without	us	realizing	it.	Scientists	have	found	that	
showing	addicts	a	picture	of
cocaine	for	just	thirty-three	milliseconds	stimulates	the	reward	pathway	in	the
brain	and	sparks	desire.	This	speed	is	too	fast	for	the	brain	to	consciously
register—the	addicts	couldn’t	even	tell	you	what	they	had	seen—but	they	craved
the	drug	all	the	same.
Here’s	the	punch	line:	You	can	break	a	habit,	but	you’re	unlikely	to	forget	it.
Once	the	mental	grooves	of	habit	have	been	carved	into	your	brain,	they	are
nearly	impossible	to	remove	entirely—even	if	they	go	unused	for	quite	a	while.
And	that	means	that	simply	resisting	temptation	is	an	ineffective	strategy.	It	is
hard	to	maintain	a	Zen	attitude	in	a	life	filled	with	interruptions.	It	takes	too
much	energy.	In	the	short-run,	you	can	choose	to	overpower	temptation.	In	the
long-run,	we	become	a	product	of	the	environment	that	we	live	in.	To	put	it
bluntly,	I	have	never	seen	someone	consistently	stick	to	positive	habits	in	a
negative	environment.
A	more	reliable	approach	is	to	cut	bad	habits	off	at	the	source.	One	of	the
most	practical	ways	to	eliminate	a	bad	habit	is	to	reduce	exposure	to	the	cue	that
causes	it.
If	you	can’t	seem	to	get	any	work	done,	leave	your	phone	in	another
room	for	a	few	hours.
If	you’re	continually	feeling	like	you’re	not	enough,	stop	following
social	media	accounts	that	trigger	jealousy	and	envy.
If	you’re	wasting	too	much	time	watching	television,	move	the	TV	out
of	the	bedroom.
If	you’re	spending	too	much	money	on	electronics,	quit	reading
reviews	of	the	latest	tech	gear.
If	you’re	playing	too	many	video	games,	unplug	the	console	and	put	it
in	a	closet	after	each	use.
=== PAGE 81 ===
This	practice	is	an	inversion	of	the	1st	Law	of	Behavior	Change.	Rather	than
make	it	obvious
,	you	can	
make	it	invisible
.	I’m	often	surprised	by	how	effective
simple	changes	like	these	can	be.	Remove	a	single	cue	and	the	entire	habit	often
fades	away.
Self-control	is	a	short-term	strategy,	not	a	long-term	one.	You	may	be	able	to
resist	temptation	once	or	twice,	but	it’s	unlikely	you	can	muster	the	willpower	to
override	your	desires	every	time.	Instead	of	summoning	a	new	dose	of	willpower
whenever	you	want	to	do	the	right	thing,	your	energy	would	be	better	spent
optimizing	your	environment.	This	is	the	secret	to	self-control.	Make	the	cues	of
your	good	habits	obvious	and	the	cues	of	your	bad	habits	invisible.
=== PAGE 82 ===
Chapter	Summary
The	inversion	of	the	1st	Law	of	Behavior	Change	is	
make	it	invisible
.
Once	a	habit	is	formed,	it	is	unlikely	to	be	forgotten.
People	with	high	self-control	tend	to	spend	less	time	in	tempting
situations.	It’s	easier	to	avoid	temptation	than	resist	it.
One	of	the	most	practical	ways	to	eliminate	a	bad	habit	is	to	reduce
exposure	to	the	cue	that	causes	it.
Self-control	is	a	short-term	strategy,	not	a	long-term	one.
HOW	TO	CREATE	A	GOOD	HABIT
The	1st	Law
:	
Make	It	Obvious
1.1:	
Fill	out	the	Habits	Scorecard.	Write	down	your	current	habits	to	become	aware	of	them.
1.2:	
Use	implementation	intentions
:	
“I	will	[BEHAVIOR]	at	[TIME]	in	[LOCATION].”
1.3:	
Use	habit	stacking
:	
“After	[CURRENT	HABIT],	I	will	[NEW	HABIT].”
1.4:	
Design	your	environment.	Make	the	cues	of	good	habits	obvious	and	visible.
The	2nd	Law
:	
Make	It	Attractive
The	3rd	Law
:	
Make	It	Easy
The	4th	Law
:	
Make	It	Satisfying
HOW	TO	BREAK	A	BAD	HABIT
Inversion	of	the	1st	Law
:	
Make	It	Invisible
1.5:	
Reduce	exposure.	Remove	the	cues	of	your	bad	habits	from	your	environment.
Inversion	of	the	2nd	Law
:	
Make	It	Unattractive
Inversion	of	the	3rd	Law
:	
Make	It	Difficult
Inversion	of	the	4th	Law
:	
Make	It	Unsatisfying
You	can	download	a	printable	version	of	this	habits	cheat	sheet	at:	
atomichabits.com/cheatsheet
=== PAGE 83 ===
THE	2ND	LAW
Make	It	Attractive
=== PAGE 84 ===
8
How	to	Make	a	Habit	Irresistible
I
N	 THE	 1940S
,	a	Dutch	scientist	named	
Niko	Tinbergen	performed	a	series	of
experiments	that	transformed	our	understanding	of	what	motivates	us.	Tinbergen
—who	eventually	won	a	Nobel	Prize	for	his	work—was	investigating	herring
gulls,	the	gray	and	white	birds	often	seen	flying	along	the	seashores	of	North
America.
Adult	herring	gulls	have	a	small	red	dot	on	their	beak,	and	Tinbergen	noticed
that	newly	hatched	chicks	would	peck	this	spot	whenever	they	wanted	food.	To
begin	one	experiment,	he	created	a	collection	of	fake	cardboard	beaks,	just	a
head	without	a	body.	When	the	parents	had	flown	away,	he	went	over	to	the	nest
and	offered	these	dummy	beaks	to	the	chicks.	The	beaks	were	obvious	fakes,
and	he	assumed	the	baby	birds	would	reject	them	altogether.
However,	when	the	tiny	gulls	saw	the	red	spot	on	the	cardboard	beak,	they
pecked	away	just	as	if	it	were	attached	to	their	own	mother.	They	had	a	clear
preference	for	those	red	spots—as	if	they	had	been	genetically	programmed	at
birth.	Soon	Tinbergen	discovered	that	the	bigger	the	red	spot,	the	faster	the
chicks	pecked.	Eventually,	he	created	a	beak	with	three	large	red	dots	on	it.
When	he	placed	it	over	the	nest,	
the	baby	birds	went	crazy	with	delight.	They
pecked	at	the	little	red	patches	as	if	it	was	the	greatest	beak	they	had	ever	seen.
Tinbergen	and	his	colleagues	discovered	similar	behavior	in	other	animals.
For	example,	the	greylag	goose	is	a	ground-nesting	bird.	Occasionally,	as	the
mother	moves	around	on	the	nest,	one	of	the	eggs	will	roll	out	and	settle	on	the
grass	nearby.	Whenever	this	happens,	the	goose	will	waddle	over	to	the	egg	and
use	its	beak	and	neck	to	pull	it	back	into	the	nest.
Tinbergen	discovered	that	
the	goose	will	pull	
any
	nearby	round	object,	such	as
a	billiard	ball	or	a	lightbulb,	back	into	the	nest.	The	bigger	the	object,	the	greater
their	response.	One	goose	even	made	a	tremendous	effort	to	roll	a	volleyball
back	and	sit	on	top.	Like	the	baby	gulls	automatically	pecking	at	red	dots,	the
=== PAGE 85 ===
greylag	goose	was	following	an	instinctive	rule:	
When	I	see	a	round	object
nearby,	I	must	roll	it	back	into	the	nest.	The	bigger	the	round	object,	the	harder	I
should	try	to	get	it.
It’s	like	the	brain	of	each	animal	is	preloaded	with	certain	rules	for	behavior,
and	when	it	comes	across	an	exaggerated	version	of	that	rule,	it	lights	up	like	a
Christmas	tree.	Scientists	refer	to	these	exaggerated	cues	as	
supernormal	stimuli
.
A	supernormal	stimulus	is	a	heightened	version	of	reality—like	a	beak	with
three	red	dots	or	an	egg	the	size	of	a	volleyball—and	it	elicits	a	stronger
response	than	usual.
Humans	are	also	prone	to	fall	for	exaggerated	versions	of	reality.	Junk	food,
for	example,	drives	our	reward	systems	into	a	frenzy.	After	spending	hundreds
of	thousands	of	years	hunting	and	foraging	for	food	in	the	wild,	the	human	brain
has	evolved	to	place	a	high	value	on	salt,	sugar,	and	fat.	Such	foods	are	often
calorie-dense	and	they	were	quite	rare	when	our	ancient	ancestors	were	roaming
the	savannah.	When	you	don’t	know	where	your	next	meal	is	coming	from,
eating	as	much	as	possible	is	an	excellent	strategy	for	survival.
Today,	however,	we	live	in	a	calorie-rich	environment.	Food	is	
abundant,	but
your	brain	continues	to	crave	it	like	it	is	scarce.	Placing	a	high	value	on	salt,
sugar,	and	fat	is	no	longer	advantageous	to	our	health,	but	the	craving	persists
because	the	brain’s	reward	centers	have	not	changed	for	approximately	fifty
thousand	years.	
The	modern	food	industry	relies	on	stretching	our	Paleolithic
instincts	beyond	their	evolutionary	purpose.
A	primary	goal	of	food	science	is	to	create	products	that	are	more	attractive	to
consumers.	
Nearly	every	food	in	a	bag,	box,	or	jar	has	been	enhanced	in	some
way,	if	only	with	additional	flavoring.	Companies	spend	millions	of	dollars	to
discover	the	most	satisfying	level	of	crunch	in	a	potato	chip	or	the	perfect
amount	of	fizz	in	a	soda.	Entire	departments	are	dedicated	to	optimizing	how	a
product	feels	in	your	mouth—a	quality	known	as	
orosensation
.	
French	fries,	for
example,	are	a	potent	combination—golden	brown	and	crunchy	on	the	outside,
light	and	smooth	on	the	inside.
Other	processed	foods	enhance	
dynamic	contrast
,	which	refers	to	items	with	a
combination	of	sensations,	like	crunchy	and	creamy.	Imagine	the	gooeyness	of
melted	cheese	on	top	of	a	crispy	pizza	crust,	or	the	crunch	of	an	Oreo	cookie
combined	with	its	smooth	center.	With	natural,	unprocessed	foods,	you	tend	to
experience	the	same	sensations	over	and	over—
how’s	that	seventeenth	bite	of
kale	taste?
	After	a	few	minutes,	your	brain	loses	interest	and	you	begin	to	feel
full.	But	foods	that	are	high	in	dynamic	contrast	keep	the	experience	novel	and
interesting,	encouraging	you	to	eat	more.
Ultimately,	
such	strategies	enable	food	scientists	to	find	the	“bliss	point”	for
=== PAGE 86 ===
each	product—the	precise	combination	of	salt,	sugar,	and	fat	that	excites	your
brain	and	keeps	you	coming	back	for	more.	The	result,	of	course,	is	that	you
overeat	because	hyperpalatable	foods	are	more	attractive	to	the	human	brain.	As
Stephan	Guyenet,	a	neuroscientist	who	specializes	in	eating	behavior	and
obesity,	says,	“
We’ve	gotten	too	good	at	pushing	our	own	buttons.”
The	modern	food	industry,	and	the	overeating	habits	it	has	spawned,	is	just
one	example	of	the	2nd	Law	of	Behavior	Change:	
Make	it	attractive.
	The	more
attractive	an	opportunity	is,	the	more	likely	it	is	to	become	habit-forming.
Look	around.	Society	is	filled	with	highly	engineered	versions	of	reality	that
are	more	attractive	than	the	world	our	ancestors	evolved	in.	Stores	feature
mannequins	with	exaggerated	hips	and	breasts	to	sell	clothes.	Social	media
delivers	more	“likes”	and	praise	in	a	few	minutes	than	we	could	ever	get	in	the
office	or	at	home.	Online	porn	splices	together	stimulating	scenes	at	a	rate	that
would	be	impossible	to	replicate	in	real	life.	Advertisements	are	created	with	a
combination	of	ideal	lighting,	professional	makeup,	and	Photoshopped	edits—
even	the	model	doesn’t	look	like	the	person	in	the	final	image.	These	are	the
supernormal	stimuli	of	our	modern	world.	They	exaggerate	features	that	are
naturally	attractive	to	us,	and	our	instincts	go	wild	as	a	result,	driving	us	into
excessive	shopping	habits,	social	media	habits,	porn	habits,	eating	habits,	and
many	others.
If	history	serves	as	a	guide,	the	opportunities	of	the	future	will	be	more
attractive	than	those	of	today.	The	trend	is	for	rewards	to	become	more
concentrated	and	stimuli	to	become	more	enticing.	Junk	food	is	a	more
concentrated	form	of	calories	than	natural	foods.	Hard	liquor	is	a	more
concentrated	form	of	alcohol	than	beer.	Video	games	are	a	more	concentrated
form	of	play	than	board	games.	Compared	to	nature,	these	pleasure-packed
experiences	are	hard	to	resist.	We	have	the	brains	of	our	ancestors	but
temptations	they	never	had	to	face.
If	you	want	to	increase	the	odds	that	a	behavior	will	occur,	then	you	need	to
make	it	attractive.	Throughout	our	discussion	of	the	2nd	Law,	our	goal	is	to	learn
how	to	make	our	habits	irresistible.	While	it	is	not	possible	to	transform	every
habit	into	a	supernormal	stimulus,	we	can	make	any	habit	more	enticing.	To	do
this,	we	must	start	by	understanding	what	a	craving	is	and	how	it	works.
We	begin	by	examining	a	biological	signature	that	all	habits	share—the
dopamine	spike.
THE	DOPAMINE-DRIVEN	FEEDBACK	LOOP